# Data Description

The aquatic food webs in both the restored lower reach of the South Fork McKenzie River and an unrestored, upstream reference reach will be sampled at least 4 times a year beginning in the Spring of 2019. Fishes (native and naturalized/invasive) will be captured, identified, measured and weighed to determine relative abundance of species and population estimates. Stomach contents of fishes will be used to construct food webs. Stomach contents and fin clips will also be analyzed for stable isotopes in order to determine the input of allochthonous versus autochthonous production to that food web and determine placement within the meta-web structure. Dominant riparian vegetation, periphyton and detritus will be collected for mass, chlorophyll a and stable isotopes to inform the flow of production/energy through the aquatic food web.  Aquatic invertebrates will be sampled for density and relative abundance. These data will be collected from different habitat patches throughout the target reach, using stratified sampling to reflect the distribution of habitat types within the target patch (proportional to distribution of riffles, pools, side channels, etc.) in order to capture the spatial and temporal changes in the aquatic food web that may result from the stage 0 restoration actions.

**Dataset Types and Method of Collection**

*Field Data Sheets:* these will record metadata such as date, time, location, personnel, atmospheric and limnologic conditions, fish lengths and wet weights, habitat descriptors, and any other direct measures taken in the field.

*Fish Specimens:* non-salmonid fishes will be captured via angling, netting or electro-fishing, measured, euthanized and stored in ethanol solution in individual jars for transport to the lab for later processing. Total length and wet-weight will be taken for all fishes, including salmonids. Fin-clip tissue samples will be taken from salmonids before release and stored in individual containers.

*Fish Stomach Content Specimens:* Salmonids and sculpins will be live-captured and stomach contents evacuated via gastric lavage. Contents will be stored in ethanol solution and transported to the lab for processing.

*Periphyton and Aquatic Primary Producer Samples:* Periphyton will be scraped from rocks, algal mats and plants shaken loose from the substrate, both from a known planar area, into a bottomless bucket and water samples filtered over glass filters, frozen and stored in the dark for later analysis.

*Benthic and Aquatic Invertebrates:* Surber samplers will be used to collect invertebrate samples from the substrate, sieved to remove large debris, and stored in ethanol solution for transport to the lab.

*Records of Analysis:* multiple spreadsheets, isotopic analysis reports, statistical software analysis code, graphics, tables of results, and physical specimens will be generated after samples are dried, isotopes analyzed, and invertebrates identified.

**Estimated Quantity/Size of Datasets:**
Several hundred benthic invertebrate specimens, several hundred fish specimens, two or three field journals, multiple laboratory journals, a hundred MB of spreadsheets in .csv format, several GB of pictures, graphs, tables, videos for publications and presentations.

# Roles and Responsibilities

**1.**	I will  submit my data management plan to my major professor and the US Forest Service PI for review, revise accordingly, and implement it. I will be responsible for sample collection and data entry in the field, including metadata. I will be responsible for training field sampling assistants to follow data entry protocols and inspect data sheets and sample containers for completeness and accuracy. Some data collection will also occur in the laboratory, where I will be responsible for establishing data entry and sample sorting protocols, and training assistants to maintain those protocols. I will be responsible for entering data from data sheets into spreadsheets for summary statistical analyses and conversion into .csv files for import into statistical software tools. I will be responsible for data organization in terms of methods used for storage, datasheets, database format, field books, etc.. All data generated will ultimately go to the US Forest Service PI, who will conduct a final quality control inspection. Both myself and the PI will be responsible for archiving and preserving data; these data are instrumental to the PI’s long-term BACI study and will be joined with other data and archived separately.

**2.**	Sensitive data consist of information that if made public, could expose individuals to harm through identity theft, embarrassment, or other means, as well as information that could endanger the national interest if made public, such as defense vulnerabilities or superior technologies. My data will consist of non-sensitive data such as the stomach contents of fish and the carbon and nitrogen isotopes of those contents.

**3.**	The US Forest Service is the major funder for this project and obligated by US laws (some of which will not go into effect until 2020)to preserve and archive the research data. I will preserve and submit data as directed by the US Forest Service PI who will mentor me. I am also expected to keep and use and the data I collect to co-author an article for publication in a peer-reviewed journal. The data I collect will be critical to a long-term BACI study examining effects during and after the restoration. There may be additional data sharing or access requirements with collaborators on the BACI study that the Forest Service has not shared with me at this time, but as of now, only other Forest Service researchers will have access. There are multiple federal and state agencies, the Northwest Power and Conservation Council, native tribes, two universities, and a local watershed council involved in this restoration that I have not had contact with yet. Details will be updated after the research proposal is drafted and approved by my PI and graduate committee.

# Data Standards and metadata
All documents, physical or digital, will have the project identifier(index # or something else, I don't know yet), a brief description, year, month, and day noted on them. Files will be stored in a directory with the project name, and each subfolder will be labeled with the appropriate subsection of the project e.g. benthic inverts, periphyton, salmonids. Files names will consist of proj_identifier_description_YYYYMMDD.

I plan to employ both the Biological Data Profile (BDP) and the Ecological Metadata Language (EML) metadata standards. The Federal Geographic Data Committee has established the Biological Data Profile (BDP) metadata standard for datasets submitted to federal research data repositories such as the Forest Service Research Data Archive. I will us the data tool Metavist (2017) create, edit and export html or xml metadata files in the BDP standard. I will use the data tool Morpho to create, edit, export and package metadata and associated data files in the EML standard before transfer to my PI.

# Storage and Security
Data consisting of physical samples will likely be stored in a department laboratory during analysis. Field data sheets, field journals and laboratory journals will be stored in my assigned office on the OSU campus. Data sheets and journal pages will be photocopied, with copies stored separately at my residence and/or sent periodically to the PI's Juneau, AK office.

All working digital data files will be stored on my work laptop, synced to my Box project folder and backed up daily to an external drive. Laptop hard drive backup images will also be pushed to the Microsoft cloud monthly.

The PI will create a controlled-access account with the Forest Service Research Data Archive. As complete datasets and results of analyses are assembled, they will be checked for quality and accuracy using OpenRefine and transferred to my PI for further quality checks and submittal to the archive.

# Access, Data Sharing, Archiving and Preservation
 Data will be shared with the other Forest Service researchers involved with the project as .csv files and associated .xml metadata files. A secure Box account will be used to facilitate data sharing, and I will be responsible for version control and ensuring that datasets uploaded for sharing are the most up to date and clearly differentiated from other forms by using distinct file names and providing accurate associated metadata files. If researchers need to share their own analyses or modifications to the provided datasets, these files will be isolated in a separate file from the originals in the Box drive and clearly named and uploaded with current metadata to track the changes made and who made them.

 Data from this project will not be made open to the public during my tenure, and will not be archived on a public repository at the completion of my involvement. Any publications resulting from this project that I may author will not be submitted to open-access journals requiring publicly available data. Although none of the data are sensitive or intellectual property, the policy of my major professor and PI is that ecological data collected in the field will be kept private indefinitely and all rights retained, as their is no direct benefit of public release to the authors. Making it public would only aid other scientists in poaching costly sampling work for meta-analyses that often minimize the importance of observational science while using other's work to make dubious claims.

 The data will ultimately be archived and preserved through submittal to the FS Research Data Archive. The data will be submitted as .csv files with accompanying .xml files in the EML metadata format. This data will have access limited to the other Forest Service and USGS researchers on this project. This project is a component of a larger project that will continue until at least 2026, so final release of the data to the public will not occur until after this date at the earliest. Preservation will last indefinitely, and future access by the public and other researchers will be dependent on how the United States Department of Agriculture and the US Forest Service decide to implement the directives given in the OPEN Government Data Act that takes effect in 2020, and directs public agencies to make data available to the public in machine readable formats.

 All of the physical fish specimens will be transferred to the OSU Fish collection at the end of the project. Aquatic invertebrate specimens will be transferred to the OSU Arthropod collection. Datasheets and journals will be transferred to the Forest Service for archiving and preservation.

Repository with source code [here](https://github.com/clarallebot/GRAD521_DMPtemplate)
