# Data Management Plan for Research Project: Food Web Responses to Stage 0 Floodplain Restoration of South Fork of McKenzie River, OR  

## Context of Project  
The South Fork of the McKenzie River (SFMR) is a heavily-modified, deeply incised, single-channel system that provides poor spawning and rearing habitat for endangered salmonids like chinook and bull trout, as well as other native and naturalized fishes. Stage zero restoration of this system will emulate a natural flood event where the alluvial valley floodplain is scoured and leveled, leaving behind an interconnecting system of side-channels and pools, restoring groundwater connectivity, habitat diversity and connectivity to the riparian zone. "Stage 0" refers to the hydro-geological and ecological state of the system before human modification, where ecosystem services and production was at its full potential, food webs were complex and diverse, and dynamic natural processes were intact. Stage 0 restoration of the lowest reach of the SFMR was accomplished during the summer of 2018 by diverting the river while tractors filled in the main channel with aggregates and sediments, berms and other riparian zone modifications were leveled to restore the flood plain, and hundreds of logs were placed by helicopter to create natural snags and jams. The river was then slowly returned to the mainstem and allowed to push the fill material and debris wherever it naturally flowed.   

  The aquatic food web in this restored reach will be assessed for one year beginning in the Spring of 2019. Stomach contents and caudal fin samples of focal endangered salmonid species and a subset of other native and naturalized fishes will be collected. Analysis will focus on identification and relative proportions of prey items and stable isotope analysis of prey and fin tissues in order to describe the aquatic food web and the input of allochthonous versus autochthonous production to that food web or webs. These data will be collected in different seasons and at multiple locations throughout the target reach in order to capture the spatial and temporal changes in the aquatic food web that may have resulted from the stage 0 restoration.
